People with disability experience violence at higher rates than people without disability. In particular, women with disability are at greatest risk. Women with disability may also experience barriers to accessing support services.
Recognising forms of violence:
Although women with disability are affected by similar types of violence as women in the wider community, they often experience different forms of physical, psychological and sexual violence. The violence may be perpetrated by a partner, relative, paid or unpaid support worker as well as strangers. In a residential or institutional setting the perpetrator could be another resident or staff member, a medical practitioner or a service provider. Those who rely on personal care assistance may be subject to frequent violence and abuse, ranging from neglect and poor care to economic, verbal and sexual abuse.

Examples of other forms of violence towards women with disability can include:

Threatening to punish, abandon or institutionalise them
Threatening that police or other services will not believe their reports
Threatening to report them to Child Protection or have their children taken away
Threats to assistance animals (such as guide dogs)
Financial abuse
Abuse that focuses on the disability itself

How to support people with disabilities affected with violence:
Workers need to be able to get support to people with disability in ways that take into account institutional cultures and practices. There are some practical things services can do to support people with disability who are affected by violence.

These include:

Treat all people with disability with dignity and respect
Treat all people with disability as adults
Empower people to make their own informed decisions about their situations
Be sensitive to cultural and linguistic diversity (including deaf culture or speech impairments). In particular, be sensitive to the needs of people from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander or CALD communities. Remember that people with disability can also identify as belonging to minority groups including LGBTI.
Be sensitive to the needs of women with disability who are mothers
It is important to remember that the person comes before the disability. A common mistake many service providers make is to focus on issues of disability rather than what is most important to the person at that time (for example the need to escape a violent situation).

Be mindful of additional risks that the person you are supporting might be experiencing.

When supporting someone, keep in mind the following actions:

Check what, if any, communication assistance is required before any assessment of the situation
Check whether they identify as having a disability
Check whether any children identify as having a disability
Check whether they have an assistance animal and what support or provisions are required
Enquire about any supports that may be required for daily living, and who provides that support
